The aim of standardization and intelligence-led policing is
to create efficient work processes and better policing, by
introducing vertical steering mechanisms and control of
the front line to make their performance more accountable.
This means the police are militarized: there is more secrecy
and intelligence-gathering, and a high policing style of
working. Policing from a distance, using new standards,
technology and routines for stronger management by objectives
can be viewed as a shift towards digital Taylorism.
Organizationally, this is manifested in increased specialization
of functional entities, which require assistance requests, set procedures and routines, create new hierarchical
structures and reduce horizontal interaction.
Rather than achieving standardization and a new knowledge
regime, our findings reveal that “the focus of policing
is shifted to the management rather than the substance of
policing” (Tilley and Laylock, 2014: 370). This reflects
Taylor’s management principles and his desire to make processes
more seamless. Our 2018 survey also indicates
resistance from police officers to the standardization and
fragmentation of police tasks, expressing that it constrains
what matters in policing.
Further empirical research will show to what degree we
will see more variety of responses and circumvention to
micro-government of police officers behavior, because the
management system’s capacity to curtail discretion to a
certain degree is limited (Rowe, 2020: 100). It will be interesting
to see if there are other obstacles that the reform highlights
in rural and more remote areas. We have found that
officers want a police service that is present in the local
community, giving assistance when less serious crime is
committed, as well as a robust police force that is able to
meet new challenges (such as cybercrime and internet
assaults). Traditional local policing has strong support
within the police organization, and this might explain the
huge amount of expressed resistance to the new requirements.
It should be remembered that assisting the public
is perceived as a major motivation for police officers in
Norway (Wathne, 2018). Police officers find that the
police reform’s emphasis on serious crime and preparedness
conflicts with proximity to the public and being able
to perform the “small tasks” that most people need help
with. In the survey, a majority agreed with the statement:
“[I] often had a bad feeling in the stomach when going
home from work, because one was not given time (or the
resources) to do as good a job as one wanted” (see also
Wathne, Talberg and Gundhus, 2019).
Limiting discretion and decision-making is designed to
control front-line policing and the street level of the organization.
This ignores the fact that decision-making often
involves rather complex decisions made at different organizational
levels (Lempert, 1992), which makes it difficult to
govern practice from above. The top-down approach means
change is driven from the management level to control the
work of those on the front line. A more holistic approach
towards discretion would include decisions made at the
legislative, policy and enforcement levels (Bushway and
Forst, 2013; Woude and Leun, 2017). Police studies are
particularly likely to portray street-level discretionary
powers as a problem involving inappropriate attitudes and
norms, and one that therefore calls for change. Galligan
(1986) argues that the key factor in the discretionary
process lies within legislative and policy decisions,
although most studies only address the enforcement level and consequently ignore the processes by which policy is
formed (see also Woude and Leun, 2017). However, this
research implies there is a need for studies of discretion at
the management level. Goldstein (1979) famously criticized
police discretion for being insufficiently informed by systematic
analysis of the types of problems that constitute
police practice. He argued that, to do proper police work,
officers need to “know more”, so that they can understand
and respond to situations more effectively. At present, the
requirement for the front line to collect more and more realtime
data leads to a paradox: the demand for a futureoriented
police in practice makes the police more reactive
and less informed, because they have only fragments of
data, and less accumulated wisdom. The question
remains: who should know what, at which level in the
organization, so they can take decisions on holistic
grounds?