Based on the study findings, we found that the women’s computer attitudes were influenced by their computer
training, including reducing anxiety and their perceptions of usefulness, and increasing liking. In the discussion
of changing women’s computer attitudes, some researchers (e.g., Hilbert, 2011; Nakatani & Miyamoto, 2006)
argue that working women have better attitudes, but this was not supported in the current study. The factors that
influenced the attitudes of our participants were age, education level, nationality, and PC ownership. Before the
training, only lower education level women had higher anxiety. Most of the influences took effect after the
computer training. After the training, younger women and those who owned a computer increased their
perceptions of usefulness of computers; non-Taiwanese women increased their anxiety, while women who
owned computers reduced their anxiety. This indicates that the experience of learning about computers can
influence women's computer attitudes in various ways. Therefore, we should include computer learning
experience as a factor in the future research, and focus on the needs of different groups of women. To decrease
their learning difficulties, the following suggestions are provided. Wong, Chai and Gao (2011) pointed out that non-alphabetic languages such as Chinese are more
complicated to key in, including switching modes and phonetic vs. character selection, etc. The results of
this study reveal that older women and women with lower education levels tend not to be good at phonetics
and Chinese data input, so these became their biggest challenges and they needed extra help. For those who
have difficulties in data input, using different types of input approaches is suggested, such as writing
characters directly on a writing pad or keying in the phonetics of the desired characters. inconvenience caused by bad eyesight. For these women, it is suggested that TAs could assist individual
learners according to their various needs. For example, accessibility settings introduced by Jacko (2005)
such as magnifiers, text-to-speech utilities, on-screen keyboards and high contrast, could be employed. Programs that are designed for immigrant societies should adjust their design based on different cultural
requirements, as pointed out by Veith, Schubert and Wulf (2007). In this research, the foreign brides’
anxiety was higher than that of the Taiwanese women. It is suggested that the program needs to be designed
based on their culture and language to teach them how to set up a multilingual environment with familiar
data input and software. For example, Chinese women are familiar with using Hanyu Pinyin (spelling) data
input and QQ to communicate with their friends and family, so this should be taken into consideration in
the design of the program. Women who do not own their own computer do not have many chances to practice after class, so they have
less access to a computer. It is suggested that after-class practice time be provided on a regular basis to
increase their chances to practice. In addition, Selwyn (2003) suggested that governments or NGOs provide
more public computers to give the public more chances to use them. Mayhorn, Stronge, McLaughlin and Rogers (2004) argue that step-by-step teaching could reduce older
adults’ learning load. Consistent with the findings reported by Shieh et al. (2011), this study also found that
the use of screen snapshots and step-by-step methods in the design of the teaching materials was helpful to
the learners because they could review at home by themselves and could more easily recall what they had
learned in class. It is suggested that future programs adopt similar approaches to the design of the training
course materials for adult learners. In addition to improving the adults’ computer skills, it appears that the teaching assistants also gained
opportunities to learn from the adult members, which echoes the assertions about Intergenerational Learning
(Poynton, 2005). In other words, while the participating women improved their computer skills, the TAs also
grew via interaction with the women. This is an example of mutual learning that was not expected at the
beginning of the program, and so was not investigated in the current study. It is suggested that future research
can study this overlooked aspect to further understand the value of Intergenerational Learning occurring
between adult learners and young tutors in a training program.